---
layout: post
title: "WSL2 setup"
tags: wsl2
---

### Introduction
WSL2, although provides a nice unix-y abilities while on windows, still has quite
a bit of rough edges! This collects all the issues I have faced with WSL2 and
some fixes/workarounds that others have suggested. Since this 

### prevent /etc/resolv.conf from getting overwritten
This file is responsible for containing your DNS information. By default, this
gets overwritten upon every shutdown/startup. To fix this, you need the following
lines put inside `/etc/wsl.conf`: `generateResolvConf = false`. IOW:
```
sudo tee /etc/wsl.conf << EOF
[network]
generateResolvConf = false
EOF
```

I *think* this requires a shutdown/startup of WSL2.

### /etc/resolv.conf gets deleted upon shutdown/startup
This happens even after one has updated the `/etc/wsl.conf` to explicitly prevent
the OS from rewriting this file upon startup! Full issue can be found
[here](https://github.com/microsoft/WSL/issues/6977). This seems to be a
regression in WSL2. So, for now, the solution is to make this file
write-protected by doing: `sudo chattr +i /etc/resolv.conf`. Obviously, this
means that you wont be able to modify this file later as well! So, you'll have
to remove the write protection before modifying this file and then adding it
back afterwards.

### Network not working (while NOT on VPN)
This is one of the common issues. If you are NOT on VPN, then you need to make
sure that the DNS server as shown by your windows command `ipconfig /all` has
been updated inside the `/etc/resolv.conf`. If your system has Intel WiFi adapter
then the following *powershell* command gives you the DNS servers ([Reference](https://gist.github.com/pyther/b7c03579a5ea55fe431561b502ec1ba8)):
```
(Get-NetAdapter | Where-Object InterfaceDescription -like "Intel*" | Get-DnsClientServerAddress).ServerAddresses
```

### Network not working (while on VPN)
Same as above, but you can use the following command (for eg if you are using
Cisco's AnyConnect VPN) to know the DNS servers:
```
(Get-NetAdapter | Where-Object InterfaceDescription -like "Cisco*" | Get-DnsClientServerAddress).ServerAddresses
```
Additionally, I have noticed that it helps to also add the `domain` directive
which helps resolve short hostnames, if some of the URIs you are using while on
VPN connection could be shortened.

### After a shutdown, fresh WSL2 instance fails with `The Windows Subsystem for Linux instance has terminated.`
TODO: haven't yet found a reliable solution that worked for me!

### Fresh WSL2 instance takes quite a bit of time to start
Basically, everytime I start a fresh WSL2 instance (for eg: after a
`wsl --shutdown`), I have noticed that it takes almost 5-10 seconds before the
commandline shows up. I have seen this happening only after my upgrade to Windows 11.

TODO: haven't yet found a reliable solution that worked for me!
